#summary Consistency and transaction isolation

= Transaction Isolation in CQEngine =
CQEngine provides lock-free reads by default.

Depending on the types of queries which may be ongoing while the collection is being modified, by default CQEngine provides a level of transaction isolation which is somewhere between READ_COMMITTED, and READ_UNCOMMITTED. But CQEngine supports higher isolation levels than this default, for applications which need it. Transaction isolation can be controlled on a query-by-query basis.

This page discusses:
 * Which isolation levels can be expected by default for various types of query, and
 * How those isolation levels may be upgraded using locks on a per-query basis, for applications which need it.

= Consistency Guarantees =

CQEngine's consistency model is that objects are always added to and removed from `IndexedCollection` and indexes, with _volatile semantics_.

This guarantees that:
 * When `IndexedCollection.add`/`remove`/`addAll` etc. methods return, data has been committed to the collection and all indexes.
 * Any queries performed after those methods return, are guaranteed to see a fully consistent view (READ_COMMITTED) of objects across all data structures.

Therefore, the addition or removal of a single object while queries are in-progress, does not require any locking. Ongoing queries will see READ_COMMITTED-like transaction isolation with respect to a single object insertion or removal.

However queries which are ongoing while batch or several modifications are made to the collection, are not covered by this consistency guarantee. Those queries may see a subset of modifications made during their execution (READ_UNCOMMITTED).

= READ_COMMITTED Isolation for Batch Modifications =

Applications can use a [http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/locks/ReadWriteLock.html ReadWriteLock] (for write _always_ scenarios) or a [http://code.google.com/p/concurrent-locks/ ReadWriteUpdateLock] (for read and _potentially_ write scenarios) to obtain transactional or READ_COMMITTED isolation with CQEngine.

Applications should cache the lock in the same place as the `IndexedCollection` it will protect, and use it as follows to ensure READ_COMMITTED isolation, only when needed:

 * Methods which will make batch or multiple _modifications_ which should be viewed as an atomic transaction by reading threads, should:
  * Acquire the write lock before modifying the collection, and release it when the last modification completes. 
 * Methods which perform _queries_ requiring READ_COMMITTED isolation, should:
   * Acquire a read lock before doing so, and hold it until they have completely finished iterating through the ResultSet. 
 * Methods which perform _queries_ which would be compatible with READ_UNCOMMITTED isolation, should:
  * Perform reads _without acquiring the read lock_.
 * Applications which only do single object insertions/removals at a time, or multiple object insertions/removals which do not need to be transactional:
   * Do not need to use any locking.